---
permalink: /about/
title: "About Me"
author_profile: true
header:
  image: /assets/images/water-sand-1280w-short.jpg
  alt: "Image of a shallow, sandy-bottomed bay in Lake Superior with light playing over the rippled surface."
  overlay_image: /assets/images/water-sand-1280w.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.4
  image_caption: "Photo by Jesse Johnston"
  og_image: /assets/images/water-sand-th.jpg
  teaser: /assets/images/water-sand-th.jpg 
excerpt: "Librarian and archivist, teacher, administrator, and music scholar with extensive experience in the public sector, academic research, and teaching."
intro:
  - excerpt: "Jesse Johnston is librarian and archivist, teacher, administrator, and music scholar with extensive experience in the public sector, academic research, and teaching."
redirect_from:
  - /about.html
  - /about.htm
---

<span itemprop="name">Jesse Johnston</span><meta itemprop="description" content="Jesse Johnston is a cultural heritage professional, an educator, administrator, and musicologist who has extensive experience in the public and university sectors. He has extensive experience in the public sector as a funder and a federal program manager, as well as more than a decade of experience teaching archives and music in higher education. His research interests include performance studies, archives, postsocialism, musical instruments, musical exchange via digital media, music librarianship, and digital preservation and curation."><meta itemprop="duns" content="078589170"/><meta itemprop="naics" content="519120"/><meta itemprop="email" content="jj@jesseajohnston.net"/> is a librarian and archivist, educator, administrator, and music scholar with extensive experience in the public sector, academic research, and teaching. He has served as the <span itemprop="jobTitle">Associate Director for Information Strategy at Mcubed</span> and Senior Research Development Officer at the University of Michigan<meta itemprop="worksFor" content="University of Michigan"/>, where he works to catalyze research in the arts and humanities across all parts of the University. As a librarian and archivist, he served as a Senior Librarian for digital content <meta itemprop="jobTitle" content="Senior Digital Collections Specialist"/> at the <span itemprop="affiliation">Library of Congress</span>. He has also served as an <span itemprop="jobTitle">Archives Specialist</span> in the Ralph Rinzler Folklife Archives and Collections at the <span itemprop="affiliation">Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage</span><meta itemprop="affiliation" content="Smithsonian Institution"/> and worked on metadata and digital description for archival audio collections. As an administrator, he served as a Senior Program Officer for preservation and access and Acting Records Officer at the <span itemprop="affiliation">National Endowment for the Humanities</span> (NEH). In addition to this professional service, he has taught courses in information science and musicology at the University of Maryland<meta itemprop="affiliation" content="University of Maryland"/>, George Mason University, Bowling Green State University, and the University of Michigan&ndash;Dearborn. He maintains research interests in user practices in archives, specifically on how digitization and digital preservation impact access to cultural heritage collections as well as user practices in audio and music archives.

As an administrator and federal program manager at the NEH and the Library of Congress, Johnston has extensive experience in advising and managing programs that support activity in the arts and humanities, analyzing and communicating funding priorities and policies, and managing large and complex digital collections. As a senior librarian for digital collections at the Library of Congress during 2018 and 2019, he served as the editor for a new compendium of policies that govern the Library's digital collection management. While a program officer at NEH, he managed a program portfolio that awarded on average $1.5 million annually, and from 2015 to 2018, he also served as the project lead for NEH Common Heritage, the agency's first and only community archiving program. In these capacities, Johnston has advised hundreds of digital projects on how to create long-lasting, usable, and valuable digital resources. He has also provided expert advice to researchers developing and presenting digital projects to funders, both federal and private, across the cultural sector.  

As a teacher, Johnston has worked as an adjunct and full-time faculty member in information science and ethnomusicology departments. He has taught undergraduate ethnomusicology courses in the Department of Musicology, Composition, and Theory at <span itemprop="affiliation">Bowling Green State University</span> and in the College of Arts, Sciences, and Letters at the <span itemprop="affiliation">University of Michigan&ndash;Dearborn</span>. In information science, he has been a teaching member of the faculty at the University of Maryland iSchool<meta itemprop="affiliation" content="University of Maryland"/> and the Department of History and Art History at the George Mason University. As a scholar, he maintains research interests in ethnomusicology and specifically the performance of Moravian traditional music. He has conducted field research in traditional and popular musics with communities in the Czech Republic, the Philippines, and Czech-Americans in the Upper Midwest. He holds a PhD in musicology and a Master of Science in Information, both from the <span itemprop="alumniOf">University of Michigan</span><meta itemprop="affiliation" content="University of Michigan"/><meta itemprop="alumniOf" content="University of Michigan School of Information"/><meta itemprop="alumniOf" content="Interlochen Arts Academy"/><meta itemprop="url" content="http://www.jesseajohnston.net/"><meta itemprop="url" content="http://www.linkedin.com/in/jesseajohnston">.
