---
title: 'Metadata: Origins and Metaphors'
date: 2024-09-10
permalink: /posts/2024/metadata-origins-metaphors/
excerpt: 'Where did "metadata" come from anyway?'
header:
  image: /assets/images/rainbow-bookshelf-1280w.jpg
  overlay_image: /assets/images/rainbow-bookshelf-1280w.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.3
  image_description: "Image of a rainbow-styled bookshelf, showing rows of book spines with red, yellow, and orange colors."
  caption: "Photo by [Jason Leung](https://unsplash.com/@ninjason) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/library)"
  teaser: /assets/images/rainbow-bookshelf-th.jpg
  og_image: /assets/images/rainbow-bookshelf-th.jpg
categories:
  - collections
  - librarianship
tags:
  - metadata
  - classification
  - humanities data
classes: wide
---

The word *metadata* combines the Greek prefix "meta-," in the sense of
above or beyond, with "data," a fact or piece of information (discussed
elsewhere in this volume). The resulting concept of *metadata* suggests
"something that is beyond the data: a statement or statements about the
data."[^1] While a potentially infinite variety of information might be
included in such "information about" other information or resources, in
the context of collections and repositories the word generally refers to
information that is used to enable the discovery, use, management,
grouping, or preservation of information resources.[^2]

Multiple points of origin have been suggested for the word *metadata*
and its use in resource description. Pomerantz suggests the word is a
"deliberate play" on the usage of "meta-" as applied in *Metaphysics*,
the title applied to the collected works of Aristotle that dealt with
topics "beyond" the *Physics*.[^3] Another story suggests current usage
of the term in libraries, at least if "spelled with an initial capital
or all capitals, was actually coined by Jack E. Myers in the late 1960s
and registered in 1986 as a trademark of the Metadata Company."[^4]
Leaving aside the possible implication that anything referred to as
*metadata* must be a current or future product of that company, the
usage of metadata in this essay assumes that current, and more
generalized usage explored here, is the sense of the word as it has
"entered the public domain."[^5]

Whatever the origins of "metadata," since the 1990s the term has been
broadly used within cultural heritage organizations to describe
information about collection resources. This usage coincided with the
rise of the World Wide Web and the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). By
1995, with the first "Dublin Core" workshop, which resulted in the
creation and promulgation of the Dublin Core Element Set, the word
metadata had worked its way into "the working vocabulary of mainstream
librarianship."[^6]

The multiple points of origin for metadata as a word, and a concept,
suggest why the term seems at once so capacious but also highly
technical and precise. While the usage came from the world of computing,
where it referred to the way that operating systems and networks managed
and transported digital resources, it easily mapped conceptually onto
the practices of resource description in libraries, archives, and
museums (LAMs). As Campbell points out, this diversity of stakeholders
offers a productive tension: since "metadata has evolved from several
different communities," it requires a "theoretical paradigm that will
enable us to distinguish between different activities that have the same
labels, and to recognize similar activities labeled differently."[^7]
Gill suggests that, as the word has become "increasingly adopted and
co-opted by more diverse communities, its definition has grown in scope
to include almost anything that describes anything else."[^8] This
breadth of usage, however, may be an opportunity that opens up a chance
for dialogue between stakeholder communities and cross-pollination of
practice.

To address the multiple possible meanings of metadata, Campbell develops
a framework based in language. This extends the legacy of Svenonius's
approach to information organization, which posited that "information is
organized by describing it using a special-purpose language."[^9] This
underlies a key insight of metadata work as derived from bibliographic
practice, which suggests that descriptive, bibliographic metadata is
rooted in specific and formulaic language use within a controlled
system. Campbell extends this approach to elaborate a theory that
describes information used for resource discovery as "metonymic" (a
catalog record is *a surrogate for* the resource it describes) and
information for resource use and management as "metaphoric" (information
that provides a paradigm for how a resource might be used).[^10] In the
latter case, a resource with a content type of "text" might logically be
assumed to be read.

Metadata work, as an interdisciplinary area of practice, draws together
multiple information communities, and potentially allows for a
productive exchange of perspectives. In this spirit, Mitchell describes
metadata work as a "boundary object."[^11] Following this idea, metadata
work illustrates aspects of Star's characterization of boundary objects
as "plastic enough to adapt to local needs and constraints, . . . yet
robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites. . . . They
have different meanings in different social worlds but their structure
is common enough to more than one world to make them recognizable, a
means of translation."[^12] One of Star's canonical forms of boundary
objects is the "standard form." In the case of collectors for the
Berkeley Museum of Vertebrate Zoology was a standard way for them to
note factual information such as species, date, and location of
collection, all of which would now be understood as "standardized
information" to build and organize the museum's collections.[^13] In
other words, metadata about a museum's collections. Importantly,
boundary objects "may be abstract or concrete," thus encompassing both
metadata's instantiation in system memory and storage, but also in the
various work areas surrounding it, including description,
standardization, creation, operation and analysis, and exchange. In this
view, metadata work occupies an interstitial, community-connecting
space, productively bridging descriptive traditions in cultural heritage
with approaches from the web and digital culture, records management, as
well as information technology.

While metadata work may have multiple origins, the two perspectives
outlined above offer useful frameworks for understanding metadata as *an
area of information work*. The first view understands metadata as a
special use of language, in particular language used to provide
"information about" resources in a collection or system. The second view
illustrates that metadata work may encompass multiple spheres of
activity with similar ends of organizing and managing information, which
may operate under different means or names, but can still be understood
as shared area of work that offers opportunities for negotiation and
translation.

*Note: this post excerpts a draft of a larger essay that I am
currently working on for an edited volume. Stay tuned for that as the
canonical, extended version of the thoughts below.*

#### Endnotes

[^1]: Jeffrey Pomerantz, *Metadata*, The MIT Press Essential Knowledge
    Series (Cambridge, Mass., and London: MIT Press, 2015), 6; Steven
    Jack Miller, *Metadata for Digital Collections: A How-to-Do-It
    Manual*, 2nd ed. (Chicago: ALA Neal-Schuman, 2022), 1. And others.

[^2]: The specific distinction of organizing information resources and
    organizing "information about" those resources is further elaborated
    by Glushko et al. in *The Discipline of Organizing* (2013), but this
    formulation as a useful way to talk about *metadata* occurs in other
    definitions, too (e.g., Caplan 2003).

[^3]: Pomerantz, *Metadata*, 5.

[^4]: Priscilla Caplan, *Metadata Fundamentals for All Librarians*
    (Chicago: American Library Association, 2003), 1.

[^5]: Caplan, *Metadata Fundamentals*, 1.

[^6]: Caplan, *Metadata Fundamentals*, 2; see also S. Weibel,
    "Dublin Core Metadata for Resource Discovery,"
    Request for Comments (Internet Engineering Task Force,
    1998), https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2413.txt; Miller, *Metadata for
    Digital Collections: A How-to-Do-It Manual*.

[^7]: D. Grant Campbell, "Metadata, Metaphor, and Metonymy," *Cataloging
    & Classification Quarterly* 40, no. 3/4 (2005): 58--59,
    https://doi.org/10.1300/J104v40n03_04.

[^8]: Tony Gill, "Metadata and the Web," in *Introduction to Metadata*,
    ed. Murtha Baca, 3rd ed. (Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2016),
    https://www.getty.edu/publications/intrometadata/metadata-and-the-web/.

[^9]: Elaine Svenonius, *The Intellectual Foundation of Information
    Organization* (Cambridge, Mass., and London: MIT Press, 2000), 1,
    https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262512619/the-intellectual-foundation-of-information-organization/.

[^10]: Campbell, "Metadata, Metaphor, and Metonymy."

[^11]: Erik Mitchell, *Metadata Standards and Web Services in Libraries,
    Archives, and Museums: An Active Learning Resource* (Santa Barbara,
    Calif.: Libraries Unlimited, 2015).

[^12]: Susan Leigh Star and James R. Griesemer, "Institutional Ecology,
    'Translations' and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in
    Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39," *Social Studies
    of Science* 19, no. 3 (August 1989): 393,
    https://doi.org/10.1177/030631289019003001.

[^13]: Star and Griesemer, 410.
